1. Describe the storage objects: tablespace, buffer pool, container.

tablespace:
A Db2 table space is a set of volumes on disks that hold the data sets in which tables are actually stored. 
Every table is stored in table space.

buffer pool:
A buffer pool is an area of main memory that has been allocated by the database manager
for the purpose of caching table and index data as it is read from disk. 
Every Db2® database must have a buffer pool.
Each new database has a default buffer pool defined, called IBMDEFAULTBP.

container:

???

2. Explain the overhead of a data page.

68 bytes of overhead for
the database manager

???

3. Explain the purpose of large object descriptors.

Only a LOB
descriptor is placed in the base table row, rather than the LOB itself. Each of the
LOBs themselves are stored in a separate LOBs location controlled by the database
manager. In this arrangement, the movement of rows between the buffer pool and
disk storage will take less time for rows with LOB descriptors than they would if
they included the complete LOBs.

4. Explain an index. Talk about advantages and disadvantages.

As data is added to a table, it is appended to the bottom (unless other actions have
been carried out on the table or the data being added). There is no inherent order
to the data. When searching for a particular row of data, each row of the table
from first to last must be checked. Indexes are used as a means to access the data
within the table in an order that might otherwise not be available.

Improve performance:    In most cases, access to data is faster with an index.
                        Although an index cannot be created for a view, an index created for the table
                        on which a view is based can sometimes improve the performance of operations
                        on that view.
Ensure uniqueness:      A table with a unique index cannot have rows with identical
                        keys.

Takes extra space...

5. Explain a container.

???

6.  Explain an extent.

An extent is a block of storage within a table space container. 
It represents the number of pages of data that will be written to a container before writing to the next container. 
When you create a table space, you can choose the extent size
based on your requirements for performance and storage management.

7. Explain prefetch.

Prefetch is a mechanism for reading a set of pages into the buffer pool with only one asynchronous I/O operation.